🔷 THEORY (Short)

Dijkstra’s Algorithm is a Greedy Algorithm used to find the shortest path from a single source vertex to all other vertices in a weighted graph.

It always selects the minimum distance unvisited node
Updates distances of its neighboring nodes
Works only for non-negative edge weights

👉 It is not used for Minimum Spanning Tree, but for Single Source Shortest Path (SSSP)

🔷 ALGORITHM (Step-by-Step)

Step 1: Initialize distance array dist[]

	Set all values = ∞
	Set dist[source] = 0

Step 2: Create a visited[] array

	Mark all vertices as unvisited

Step 3: Repeat for all vertices:

	1.Select the unvisited vertex with minimum distance
	2.Mark as visited
	3.For each adjacent vertex:
		If there is an edge and it is not visited
		Update distance using:
			dist[v] = min(dist[v], dist[u] + weight(u,v))

Step 4: Continue until all vertices are visited

Step 5: Print shortest distances from source

🔷 COMPLEXITY
Time Complexity: O(V²) (using adjacency matrix)

🔷 CONCLUSION (1-2 lines for practical)
Dijkstra’s Algorithm efficiently computes the shortest path from a source node using a greedy approach and is widely used in network routing and pathfinding applications.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


🔷 VIVA QUESTIONS & ANSWERS (AI Perspective)
🔹 1. What is Dijkstra’s Algorithm?

👉 Dijkstra’s Algorithm is a greedy search algorithm used to find the shortest path from a source node to all other nodes in a weighted graph.

🔹 2. Why is Dijkstra considered an AI algorithm?

👉 In Artificial Intelligence, it is used for:

Pathfinding
State space search
Navigation systems (robots, games)

It helps an agent choose the optimal path.

🔹 3. What type of search is Dijkstra?

👉 It is a Greedy Best-First Search (uninformed search) because it selects the node with minimum cost at each step.

🔹 4. What is the role of the cost function?

👉 Cost function = distance from source
The algorithm selects the node with minimum accumulated cost (g(n))

🔹 5. What is the difference between Dijkstra and BFS in AI?
Feature	BFS	Dijkstra
Type	Uninformed	Cost-based
Edge weights	Equal	Different
Use	Simple search	Optimal path
🔹 6. What is a state space in this context?

👉 Each node in the graph represents a state, and edges represent transitions between states.

🔹 7. What is the goal of the algorithm in AI terms?

👉 To find the optimal path (least cost path) from initial state to goal state.

🔹 8. What is Greedy strategy in this algorithm?

👉 Always choosing the locally optimal choice (minimum distance node) hoping it leads to global optimum.

🔹 9. Does Dijkstra guarantee optimal solution?

👉 ✔ Yes, if all edge weights are non-negative

🔹 10. Why does it fail with negative weights?

👉 Because greedy choice becomes incorrect when future paths reduce cost.

🔹 11. What data structure is used in optimized Dijkstra?

👉 Priority Queue (Min Heap)
→ Improves efficiency

🔹 12. What is the time complexity?
Basic version → O(V²)
Optimized version → O(E log V)
🔹 13. What is relaxation in Dijkstra?

👉 Updating the shortest distance:

dist[v] = dist[u] + weight(u,v)

if smaller

🔹 14. What is the difference between Dijkstra and A* search?
Feature	Dijkstra	A*
Heuristic	❌ No	✔ Yes
Speed	Slower	Faster
AI usage	Basic	Advanced
🔹 15. What is heuristic function?

👉 A function that estimates cost to reach goal
Used in A*, not in Dijkstra

🔹 16. What is the limitation of Dijkstra in AI?

👉 It does not use heuristics, so it explores more nodes than necessary.

🔹 17. What is an adjacency matrix?

👉 A 2D array representing graph connections:

0 → no edge
Non-zero → weight
🔹 18. What is visited array used for?

👉 To avoid revisiting nodes and reduce computation

🔹 19. What is the difference between MST and shortest path?
MST	Shortest Path
Connect all nodes	Find path
Total cost minimum	Path cost minimum
🔹 20. Is Dijkstra used for MST?

👉 ❌ No
✔ Used for shortest path

MST uses:

Prim’s Algorithm
Kruskal’s Algorithm
🔹 21. What are real-world AI applications?

👉 Used in:

Google Maps navigation
Robot path planning
Game AI movement
Network routing
🔹 22. What is optimality in AI?

👉 Choosing the best possible solution (minimum cost path)

🔹 23. What happens if graph is disconnected?

👉 Some nodes will remain at infinity distance

🔹 24. What is the input to the algorithm?

👉 Graph + source node

🔹 25. What is the output?

👉 Shortest distance from source to all nodes

🔷 BONUS (VERY IMPORTANT FOR VIVA 🔥)

👉 If examiner asks:

“Which AI category does this belong to?”

Answer:
✔ Uninformed Search (Greedy Search)